---
title: >
    Read the Manual: last
tool: last
subtitle: >
    A tiny tool I used for the first time in late September, 2024.

date: 2024-10-03T20:44:00-0600

summary: >
    When was the *last* time a user logged in, or the computer got shut down or restarted? `last` is one way to find out!

---

A few weeks ago, I was curious what my laptop’s “uptime” was—in part because it was acting a bit funky—and I realized I had no idea how to answer that question, but I also figured (correctly) it should be simple, so I looked it up. This Thursday’s Read the Manual adventure is about the answer: `last`.

`last` tells you when users last logged in. (And ttys, which is great for administrating systems which have people accessing them other ways. But for my purposes: users.) Fair warning: if you just type `last` you may get a *lot* of data. A year’s worth, in my case: 2885 lines. To limit that output, you can pass `-n` to get how many of the most recent logins to show

More usefully, though, since login happens on a modern Mac every time you unlock the computer (which is a lot, if you’re like me!), you can ask for just reboots with `last reboot`. `last shutdown` works, too. These are a fun “hack” on the basic design: `last <username>` gives you the last login for a given user—so `shutdown` and `reboot` are just “pseudo users”. Don’t name your user one of those, I guess. (Good advice for lots of reasons!)

Also, both the man page and `tldr` say a lot of things which appear to be blatantly false on macOS, which is weird. The files the man page references? They don’t exist! My guess is the `tldr` difference is a BSD-vs.-Linux-ism, but I have no idea why the man page is wrong!

That’s it for this one—short and sweet but really useful!
