---
title: "Read the Manual: cd"
tool: cd
subtitle: >
    One of the few Unix tools that actually follows the Unix philosophy! Mostly, anyway.

date: 2024-10-11T16:02:00-0600

---

This week’s [Read the Manual][rtm] entry is late because yesterday I wrote up my thoughts on [programming language pedagogy][plp] instead. Today’s subject is the trusty `cd` command. How much can there be to changing directories? Not a lot, but there are still some interesting things to learn here!

There are, gloriously, *zero* flags for the command… if, like me, you use fish. It takes a single argument: `cd [DIRECTORY]`. The main interesting thing is that fish “ships a wrapper function around the builtin cd” which lets you use `cd -` to go to the previous directory.

(As an aside: I often don’t even bother with typing `cd`, because in fish, you don’t have to. You just type a valid directory name and fish moves the current directory there. This is one of those things that I have still not fully internalized, though, even 5 years along!)

So about that built-in—finding the man page is a bit of an adventure in digging. If you `man cd` in any built-in shell on macOS, e.g. zsh, you will get the man page for `BUILTIN(1)` and an instruction to “See the built-in command description in the appropriate shell manual page.” The obvious next move is `man zsh` or `man bash` and searching for `cd`. That doesn’t help in the case of `zsh`, because its docs are (reasonably!) broken up into other man pages; you actually need to do `man zshbuiltins`. It *does* work from `man bash`, though.

In bash, there are two options: `-P` to use the “physical” directory structure and not to follow symlinks, `-L` to *force* symlinks to be followed. It also gets configuration from the `CDPATH` variable, which changes how `cd` “searches” for non-absolute paths.

In zsh, there are two additional options, `-q` for quiet, which skips calling functions zsh lets you use for printing output when you change directories, and `-s` for refusing to navigate if the path includes symlinks. There are also two additional forms you can call in zsh:

1. You can pass two values, like `cd <old> <new>`, to replace `<old>` with `<new>` in the current directory name, e.g. if I were in `~/dev/chriskrycho/some-nested-path` and typed `cd chriskrycho rust-lang`, it would try to go to `~/dev/rust-lang/some-nested-path`. Cool? 🤷🏻‍♂️

2. You can pass `+n` or `-n` where `n` is a number and move through your directory history by `n` entries. I actually missed this a bit in fish early on, but fish gives the `cdh` command and I actually find that more useful, because remembering exact directory history is hard!

And that’s pretty much it. zsh also supports some other shenanigans using shell variables, but since I am a fish user, I… really don’t care. 😅

By far the most useful thing I learned today was how to read the manual entries for built-ins. The most useful thing I learned from the man page *itself* is that if you just do `cd`, with no argument at all, it goes to `HOME`. Instead of typing `cd ~`, you can just skip the extra characters and the extra dance with the Shift key. Neat!


[rtm]: https://v5.chriskrycho.com/journal/read-the-manual/
[plp]: https://v5.chriskrycho.com/journal/rant-on-pl-docs/
