---
title: "Read the Manual: rm"
subtitle: Another old Unix standby… without *too* many extra flags.

date: 2024-10-24T09:00:00-0600

---

The `rm` command is the Unix way to “remove directory entries”. Right off the bat, opening the man page, I learned that the `unlink` command exists, is an alias to `rm`, and… has different rules than `rm`. Amazing.

Let’s get `unlink` out of the way first: you are only allowed to pass a single argument, and it is not allowed to be a directory. It is, as far as I can tell, basically a command that just invokes the `unlink` POSIX operation directly on a single file. Could be handy sometimes!

Now, `rm` has a bunch of flags:

- `-d` tries to remove directories as well as other kinds of files; by default `rm` will *not* touch directories.

- `-f` tries to remove everything you specify, regardless of file permissions_by default `rm` will not delete non-writable files.

- `-R` tries to “remove the file hierarchy rooted in each file argument”, i.e. if you hand it a directory it recursively deletes it and its contents—so it implies `-d`.

- `-r` is equivalent to `-R`. I have literally only ever used `-r`, though: I did not know `-R` existed!

If that sounds dangerous, it is, so there are also the `-i` and `-I` flags:

- `-i` wants confirmation for every. single. file. you delete. regardless of file permissions. 😳

- `-I` is like `-i` but only prompts if you are deleting more than 3 files or doing `-r`.

In the <span class='all-smcp'>WHOA</span> bucket: `-W` attempts to *undelete* the files you pass to it. But it “can only be used to recover files covered by whiteouts in a union file system”, which I don’t *think* APFS is? I don’t know what file systems *do* work that way, actually (feel free to chime in!).

You can absolutely hose yourself with `rm` with some of those! If you decide to delete everything in the current directory, `rm -rf ./*`, and you forget that leading `.`, you are in for a world of hurt: you just forcibly recursively deleted your entire machine. I have done this! I caught it relatively quickly and had a local Time Machine backup, so I survived, but it was terrifying, and I was not sure I was going to get out of it without doing a complete restore from that Time Machine backup. It taught me a really important lesson, though!

A good tip, then, is to either build the habit of always passing `-I` if you are going to `rm -rf`, or possibly even to alias `rm` to `rm -I` so you don’t accidentally delete everything on your system.
