---
title: "Read the Manual: du"
tool: du
subtitle: >
    Disk utility. Not that Mac app you might be thinking of, the older one.

date: 2024-10-17T20:58:00-0600

---

Today’s Read the Manual entry is about `du`, for disk usage! A positively ancient utility:

> du… first appeared in Version 1 AT&T UNIX.

And:

> This version of du was written by Chris Newcomb for 4.3BSD-Reno in 1989.

Till now, I have only ever `du -sh`. Time to change that!

The first interesting flag is the first flag listed in the manual: `-A` displays the *apparent* size in distinction to the disk usage, for “compressed volumes or sparse files”. Neither of which I was familiar with before just now (I have heard the terms, but that’s it). So, just now I learned that a sparse file is one which is mostly empty, and a file system can use metadata to store it as a *much* smaller file—presumably using some heuristics/tradeoff where the metadata is enough smaller than the empty space that would otherwise be used. Neat!

A compressed volume—which I don’t think is that common among file systems, but ZFS has it!—is a volume where files are compressed and decompressed on the fly. Obviously costs CPU to de/compress, but I could see many situations in which that tradeoff would be worth it. Also neat!

Going back to `du` itself, the most common flags I have actually used are worth explaining.

- `-s` displays an entry for each specified file instead of showing the tree of files in a directory if you name a directory. I basically never want to see a whole tree like that!

- `-h` formats the output to be “human-readable” (thus the `h`), using unit suffixes for (kilo|mega|giga|tera|peta)?bytes, all using powers of 1024. This rounds *aggressively* but usefully. A directory I have that is 146436096 bytes is printed as 140M. Just today I learned that `--si` will use powers of 1000 instead of 1024, so it’s “human-readable”… but different than `-h` “human-readable”. 

You can also specify the size of block you want to count with: kilobytes `-k`, megabytes `-m`, gigabytes `-g`. No flags for terabytes or petabytes. Note that this is *block size* not *output formatting*. The block size is literally “report as if the disk blocks were this big”.

Unsurprisingly given its job, `du` also has flags for whether to follow symlinks:

- `-H` for “yes for the files you tell me but no in the hierarchy”
- `-L` for “follow *alllll* the symlinks”
- `-P` for “nothing at all”, which is the default

And for depth to recurse with `-d`.

Bonus: the tool I am apt to reach for just as much as `du` these days is the very nice (and very fast!) [dust](https://github.com/bootandy/dust) tool, so named because it is like `du` and written in Rust (because of course it is!).
