---
title: "Read the Manual: id"
subtitle: >
    When you need to know a bit more about how the system identifies a given user.
tool: id
date: 2024-11-21T20:40:00-0700
---

This week’s Read the Manual is about `id`: a tool I only learned the existence of while researching [last week’s entry](https://v5.chriskrycho.com/journal/read-the-manual/lsof/) on `lsof`! It gives you users’ user names, group names, and numeric IDs for a given user. This is handy when you need one of those pieces to pass to some other data—like the user ID.

If you just run `id`, you get the user ID list for the current user. If you pass some other user name, you get the ID for that user.

The options are all just for variations on displaying the output, so this is pretty close to the Unix “do just one thing” philosophy. Some of those options:

- `-F` gives you the full name of the user (`id -F` → `Chris Krycho` on my Mac)
- `-G` gives you the group IDs for the user, as numbers, “in no particular order”
- `-g` gives you the *effective* group ID as a number
- `-u` gives you the effective *user* ID as a number
- `-n` is a very helpful modifier for the `-G`, `-g`, and `-u` flags because it gives you the name of those values. So `id -u` gives me `501`, but `id -un` gives me `chris`. Handy.
- `-r` is likewise a modifier on other flags; it gives you *real* rather than *effective* group or user IDs.

I don’t honestly know when I would need almost any of these, other than when trying to chase down some *very* weird system behavior—probably in conjunction with tools like `ps` and `lsof`, or even `htop` or `procs`.

Have you ever had cause to use them? I’d love to hear some details!
