---
title: Designing an Atomic CSS System
subtitle: Making my CSS scalable from the outset.
date: 2020-05-15T13:30:00-0600
tags:
    - CSS
    - design
    - design systems
    - web design
summary: >
    TODO
---

I’m starting building the visuals for the web view of [<b><i>re</i>write</b>][rewrite], and I want this system to be *easy* to work on. While actively avoiding [the infra engineer’s blind spot][blind-spot], I *do* want to engineer things well. I have concluded over the past few years that my preference is using (something like) [Atomic CSS][atomic-css]—with a slight twist. Atomic CSS typically emphasizes putting all those classes in your stylesheet. I prefer to use the atoms to define semantic class names instead, which represent a meaningful *composition* of those styles. This combines the reliability of an atomic CSS approach with the reusability of a more component-oriented design pattern. In other words, it combines the ideas of atomic CSS with the ideas of [atomic *design*][atomic-design].

Here’s what this looks like in practice, as I build out the design system for the first time today.

11:45
: I have *just* started. My CSS (technically [SCSS]) looks like this:

    ```scss
    
    ```
    
    (That’s not a mistake! It’s just literally empty, because I just started. It will fill up in the bits below.)

12:03
: I have some CSS now! In the interest of minimizing time spent on typeface choices today, I’m going with just using the system fonts, via [this lovely setup][system-font-css]. But it’s time for the first decision here: do I apply this to the `body` element, as a default? It’s definitely the *safest*, as then it “just works” everywhere else. However, it also means that everywhere else has to explicitly *override it*. This is probably for the best, and it’s probably what I want in the system in general.

13:39
: I’ve made no progress on this in the last 90 minutes, because refinancing a home is complicated and involves a lot of time with a spreadsheet and on the phone. I am, however, thinking about the appropriate mix of “componentization” vs. just using the atomic styles directly… and how what I actually want is the ability to define a reusable block of styles which simply *compiles* to . This is the promise of many CSS-in-JS libraries, and it makes a lot of sense. On the other hand, maybe I solve that by just defining it as functions which return those sets of class names on the *Elm* side.

16:18
: The refinance work squared away, and I’ve had a good long conversation with a friend familiar with both this project and CSS. My list of atoms is slowly growing:

    ```css
    .type-system {
      font-family: system-ui, sans-serif;
    }
    
    .fs-base {
      font-size: 16px;
    }
    
    .m-0 {
      margin: 1rem;
    }
    
    .p-0 {
      padding: 1rem;
    }
    ```

    It currently gets applied to the app like this:
    
    ```elm
    bodyClasses : Html.Attribute msg
    bodyClasses =
        class "type-system fs-base m-0"
    ```

    I have no idea whether I’ll end up keeping exactly these names (spoilers: I *probably* won’t), but the point today is to make progress. And I am!
    
    And my friend—humorously and kindly but not inaccurately described CSS as Crazy Stupid Stylesheets: “It’s wonderful, but also it’s crazy and kind of stupid.”

[rewrite]: https://rewrite.software
[blind-spot]: https://v5.chriskrycho.com/journal/infra-engineers-blind-spot-the/
[atomic-css]: https://css-tricks.com/lets-define-exactly-atomic-css/
[atomic-design]: https://atomicdesign.bradfrost.com
[SCSS]: https://sass-lang.com
[system-font-css]: https://github.com/jonathantneal/system-font-css

*[CSS]: cascading style sheets
*[SCSS]: Sassy CSS
*[JS]: JavaScript