Title: Finding God in Proverbs
Date: 2014-01-03 23:00
Author: Chris Krycho
Slug: finding-god-proverbs
Category: theology
Tags: devotions
Passages: 1 Kings 19–2 Kings 1, Psalm 3, Proverbs 3
Template: formats/devotions

One of the most helpful patterns I have developed in the last few years of
Scripture reading is asking one simple question as I read: *What does this
passage reveal about God?* There are many other questions---good, important
questions---to ask of the text. But this one, I find, yields the most fruit. The
Bible is not just a book of moral teachings, nor a mere practical guide for our
lives. It is the revelation of the living God to his people.[^1]

So what do we do when we get to, say, Proverbs? At first blush, the question
seems a good deal less tractable here than in many other places. However hairy,
most narratives *do* show us the character of God. Propositional content,
whether in letters or sermons or parables or prophecies, likewise tends to make
clear, succinct statements about the person and nature of God. The Proverbs,
though? Well, sometimes they do, and sometimes they say things like, "Do not
contend with a man for no reason, when he has done you no harm." That's helpful,
to be sure, but when you first read it, it's not obvious how that gets us back
to God. We could try to hammer the Proverbs into some framework for
understanding God, try to reduce their presence in the canon to a role in some
theme or another.[^2] In the end, though, any such reductive effort is going to
run aground on the shoals of misunderstanding---quite the opposite of the intent
of the author.

The Proverbs often show us God's character sideways. If we believe that the
counsel offered by the Proverbs really is wise---that the glowing promises here
in Proverbs 3 of blessing, gain, and profit from wisdom are true, that there
really is nothing better than to have understanding---then we believe that they
are insights into reality. And reality was made *by God*:

>     Yahweh by wisdom founded the earth;
>         by understanding he established the heavens;
>     by his knowledge the deeps broke open,
>         and the clouds drop down the dew. (Proverbs 3:19--20)

If we then start asking good questions of the text we find very quickly that we
do have a path back to the person and nature of God. For example: *why* should
we not contend with a man when he has done us no harm? Well, we ought not do so
because it will certainly stir up trouble, and we know God does not delight in
strife. Moreover, picking a fight with someone without cause is unjust, and this
same author has told us that wisdom comports with justice and righteousness, and
that *God* is just.

Taking a further step back, we can ask why this proverb is included in the
inspired Scriptures. Then we see even more: God cares about the way people
interact with one another. He values human flourishing, and so has provided
enormous guidance for us in the form of hundreds upon hundreds of practical
insights into the way the world is. He delights in people so greatly that he
crosses the boundary between transcendence and immanence to give us his very
words.

It turns out there is an awful lot to learn about God in the Proverbs---even the
ones that do no mention him.

[^1]: That final phrase, "to his people," is an important one for all
hermeneutics; reading the Scriptures with faith makes a difference. [Matthew Lee
Anderson][mla] makes this point helpfully and at some length in his excellent
[_The End of Our Exploring_][eoe].

[^2]: It is right here that many Biblical theologies---that's a specific
discipline in theology, though admittedly poorly named---go amiss.

[mla]: http://mereorthodoxy.com/
[eoe]: http://www.amazon.com/End-Our-Exploring-Questioning-Confidence-ebook/dp/B00BUP1BQQ/?tag=krycho-20