Title: Kings in Contrast
Date: 2014-01-02 21:00
Author: Chris Krycho
Slug: kings-contrast
Category: theology
Tags: devotions
Passages: 1 Kings 14–18, Psalm 2, Proverbs 2
Template: formats/devotions

Tonight's reading in 1 Kings, Psalms, and Proverbs had some surprising overlaps.
The material in 1 Kings covered a series of kings whose courses were largely
*away* from worshipping Yahweh and toward worshipping other gods. With only one
exception, in fact, every single king listed in these five chapters rejected the
God of Israel in favor of the gods of the nations which the Hebrews had driven
out of Canaan. That exception, Asa, stands in sharp contrast to the litany of
rebellious kings who preceded and followed him as being a man who followed God
with his whole heart. Others, it seems, included Yahweh in their list of gods to
worship, but never reverenced him as supreme and only. This list of wicked kings
of both Israel and Judah climaxes with the appearance of Elijah, the righteous
prophet who confronts the *most* wicked king in the list, and who ultimately
demonstrates Yahweh's superiority over the other gods the Hebrews worshipped.

Proverbs 2 continues Solomon's exhortation to seek wisdom wholeheartedly, and
his corresponding encouragement that Yahweh gives wisdom to those who seek it.
But Solomon did not stop with the idea that knowledge and understanding are good
---though this he certainly affirms. Rather, he continued on to emphasize that
God's knowledge and discernment go hand in hand with his integrity and justice.
Those who seek this wisdom walk in righteousness and justice and equity. A
person of wisdom is kept safe from both evildoers and from doing evil him- or
herself. That Solomon's own line, beginning with his own son and continuing on
down through every king but Asa in these chapters in 1 Kings, went so far astray
indicates how little these words were heeded.

The picture painted by Psalm 2 stands in impossibly sharp contrast to these
depraved kings. The Anointed One of the psalm is a messianic figure: those who
take refuge in him find shelter, but those who rebel against him are broken
under his rule. There is a king in view here who laughs at the rebellion of the
rulers of every nation (Israel included), who scorns the folly of plotting
against the Most High God. The king that Yahweh calls his Son will receive those
same nations as his inheritance. He will be the king above all other kings. He
will be both wrathful against rebellion and merciful to those who "take refuge
in him" (v. 11--12).

So we have set before us the history of wicked men rebelling against the very
God who gave them their thrones, and a call to that same line of the kings to
humbly seek wisdom from that God, and a poetic picture of the true king against
whom any rebellion is folly. And running through all of these are both the wrath
of God against the folly and sin of those rebelling against him, and his mercy.
Yahweh saves his people from following other gods in that magnificent
confrontation on the mountain, Elijah on one side and the priests of Baal on the
other. He is the source of wisdom, and the one who keeps his people from walking
in folly or wickedness. And he is the righteous king who gives his people peace
and security. Not because he does not do justice or cares little about sin, but
precisely *because* he does justice and cares about sin. That Anointed One, that
Son of the Most High, is Jesus Christ, who died in order that everything would
be put under his feet. Every wicked king in 1 Kings points to the need for
Jesus. He is the fulfillment of the wisdom promised in Proverbs 2. He is the
Anointed One, the Son of Yahweh, who reigns the nations in righteousness.
Hallelujah.