Title: Resolved to Pray
Date: 2014-02-04 07:40
Author: Chris Krycho
Category: theology
Tags: devotions
Passages: 1 Thessalonians 1, Psalm 35, Ecclesiastes 4
Template: formats/devotions
Description: Paul's prayerful openings to letters are a good reminder that I
    ought to pray more and of how I ought to pray.

Paul's letters all open with a common pattern: he gives the typical introduction
of his era with his own name and those of his co-authors, and then proceeds to
explain how he prays for the people to whom he is writing. I read once of
someone who went through and looked at all the things Paul prays for people in
his epistles and used those as a basis for his own prayers for others. That
seems a remarkably good idea to me. Paul's heart for each and every church to
which he ministered is readily apparent.

I hope and pray that as I step more and more into ministry, my own heart would
be so dedicated to the good of those whom I serve, and that I would be so
faithful as Paul was to pray regularly for them. I have a long way to go in
this; I do not pray as much even for my own family and friends as I would like.
Jaimie and I have made prayer a regular part of our lives by sitting down as a
family together to pray every night before we put Elayne to bed, and I pray at
times throughout the day. These are good things. I am glad we have taken these
steps to make prayer a regular part of our lives. Even so, I am much less
dedicated and disciplined in prayer than many I know and especially than the
many heroes of the faith who distinguished themselves in large part through the
faithfulness of their prayers and their trust that God would answer.

The content of Paul's prayers is just as important as their frequency, though.
Reading 1 Thessalonians 1 reminded me of the *kinds* of things I ought to be
praying, as well as *that* I ought to be praying. In this particular
introduction, Paul is above all grateful to God for the Thessalonians' "work of
faith  and labor of love and steadfastness of hope in our Lord Jesus Christ."
This faithfulness before God resounded throughout the early church; these
believers had a reputation for their perseverance in the face of persecution and
their love of God. What a thing to start praying for the believers I know, and
especially for my church and the missionaries we have sent out: that we would be
known for our faith, love, and steadfast hope in Jesus Christ; that we would
persevere in the face of challenges to our faith and even outright persecution;
that the testimony of our deeds would go forth and be an encouragement to the
rest of the Church.

Resolved, then: to pray more faithfully for my fellow saints, first of all at
First Baptist Church of Durham and then in the other churches I know and love
and then throughout the world as I hear of them; and to pray more thoughtfully
and wisely for God to make of us all the kinds of people over whom Paul was
rejoicing in these early verses of this letter. Amen.