Title: From Creation to Consummation
Subtitle: A Meditation on Psalm 24
Description: The structure of Psalm 24 is not obvious—but the journey is
    profoundly rewarding. David beautifully leads us from creation to 
    consummation.
Date: 2014-01-24 22:05
Author: Chris Krycho
Category: theology
Tags: devotions
Passages: Nehemiah 1–5, Psalm 24, Proverbs 24
Template: formats/devotions

Some texts are a bit more mysterious than they might at first appear. One such
is Psalm 24, at least for me. The poem has three basic sections:

- a declaration of Yahweh's possession of and sovereignty over the world he made
  (vv. 1--2)
- a reflection on the character of one who may approach Yahweh (vv. 3--6)
- a call to and an act of exultation in the glory of Yahweh (vv. 7--10)

At first glance, there is no obvious connection between these three elements.
The third might seem to follow from the first to some extent, but the emphases
are all different. The first section addresses Yahweh's rule over creation; the
last enjoins gates and doors[^gates-doors] to worship him on the basis that he
---Yahweh of hosts---is the king of glory. The middle section, on the character
of those who can approach him, seems completely disconnected from either.

Yet David, the author of the Psalm, was not an idiot. When we find passages like
this in Scripture and cannot at first see how to put them together, it behooves
us to take a step back and consider them at further length.[^consider] David
intended his poem to be understood, and not by God only. The pieces *do* relate;
the question is simply *how* they fit. As is the way of all good poetry, there
are holes here, and they require of the audience a bit more engagement than
would a direct statement of David's intent.

Sure enough, these pieces do relate. Each points us to a different aspect of
Yahweh's nature. Indeed, the outline I wrote out above is actually a good
summary of David's intent here. In verses 1--2, we see that Yahweh owns the
world he made. He is both creator and ruler. He is sovereign over creation,
including the men and women who live in this world. Then, in verses 3--6, we see
his moral character. The requirements for anyone to approach Yahweh's holy place
tell us just as much about Yahweh as about those who seek him: he is holy, he
has clean hands (meaning he has not done nothing wrong), he is pure in heart, he
rejects all idolatry, and he is utterly trustowrthy. Moreover, he blesses those
who are like him; he makes them righteous and saves them. Finally in verses 7--
10, we see that he is glorious, strong and mighty, a king. He is not just *any*
king, but *the* King of glory. He owns glory; it is his and no other's. He is
stronger than any who would oppose him. He will triumph over his enemies. He
will come into the city and take up his reign.

In short, the Psalm moves us from creation to consummation. Yahweh made and
rules over the world. He calls his people to be holy, as he is holy, and he
makes them righteous and saves them. He will come into his glory as the King.
And David gets us there without ever coming out and saying those bare facts; the
poem moves our hearts the more thoroughly because he makes us work for us, and
because he does so with such aching beauty.

>     Lift up your heads, O gates!
>         And lift them up, O ancient doors,
>         that the King of glory may come in.
>     Who is this King of glory?
>         Yahweh of hosts,
>         he is the King of glory! Selah. (Psalm 24:9–10)

Hallelujah.

[^gates-doors]: Over-familiarity with the text has also perhaps dulled us to the
curiosity of this exhortation. Perhaps there was something going on culturally
we are missing today, but this is the only place in Scripture that anyone
addresses gates and doors, to my knowledge.

[^consider]: Of course, that assumes we are paying enough attention to recognize
that the poem is doing something unusual in the first place---and, dare I say
it, we too rarely are paying heed so closely.
