Title: Wisdom From God
Description: Something
Author: Chris Krycho
Date: 2014-03-03 20:00
Tags: devotions
Category: theology
Passages: Proverbs 3, Psalm 52, and Acts 27–28

Proverbs 3, as part of the first third or so of the book focused on laying out
the two paths which the remainder of the book traces out in greater detail,
highlights the value of wisdom and gives the first few details as to what it
looks like to walk in wisdom. First and foremost, wisdom is a matter of walking
with Yahweh, in accord with his revelation of himself. Verses 3--4 make this
abundantly clear, echoing as they do Moses' words to Israel in giving them the
law. Just as the people of God were to bind his law on their bodies and their
hearts, so the author of the Proverbs exhorts his son to remember "steadfast
love and faithfulness"---the very attributes with which Yahweh characterized
himself in that climactic moment on the mountain in <cite class="bibleref"
title="Ex 34.6">Exodus 34</cite>.

So although some scholars have asserted that the Proverbs (and indeed the rest
of the literature) developed totally separately from the Law of Israel, such a
proposition looks to me more like wishful thinking on the part of secularists
than an accurate acknowledgement of the shape of the text. Proverbs is not
separate from the Torah. It is *commentary* on the Torah. Indeed, there is no
part of the moral Law given to Israel that does *not* come up for discussion in
the course of the book. Worshipping Yahweh is front and center. Murder and
adultery both come in for repeated admonition. Rejection of not only
covetousness and envy but also of the roots beneath them is pervasive. To put
it as Dr. Heath Thomas did in my Old Testament class several weeks ago: the
Torah told Israel *what* to do, and the Proverbs taught them *how*.

So Proverbs 3 sits as part of this project. Its famous admonition to trust
Yahweh and not to lean on one's own understanding is one of the lynchpins of
the book.[^eccl] The whole book must be taken in light of this admonition.
Human wisdom is not God's wisdom.

It is no coincidence that the author of the book turns almost immediately from
exhorting his audience to trust in Yahweh rather than in human wisdom to a
picture of divine wisdom. Nor is it mere happenstance that he includes the
notion that Yahweh created the earth *by* wisdom and established the heavens
*by* understanding.[^by] This is essential to understanding the shape and
argument of Proverbs. God made the world to work in a certain way, and we either
walk in that way or we do not. The way we have chosen---our broken, sinful
path---is not in line with the way the universe was designed. The way he has set
before us---the way of reconciliation in Christ Jesus---is the way of shalom.
And Proverbs thus is a guide for the Christian for what it means to follow
Christ. It is the light to our path as we seek to keep God's law, recognizing
that he who made all things has also shown us how to walk in line with the way
he made those things---indeed, with how he made *us*.

This is why we should not lean on our own understanding: because it is not only
flawed, but forever incomplete. Even when we are sanctified---perhaps
*especially* when we are sanctified---we will not lean on our own
understanding, but rest in the wisdom of the one who *is* wisdom, and who
shaped the universe to his wisdom.

[^eccl]: And, I would note, the key to understanding the entire book of
Ecclesiastes. If we take Proverbs 3:5--8 as a guide and then we read Ecclesiastes,
the problem that *Qoheleth* had becomes clear rather quickly, and then is
reiterated throughout that book: the Preacher trusted his own wisdom instead of
God's. Proverbs is the foundational text for biblical wisdom, and other wisdom
books must be understood in light of it.

[^by]: It is impossible not to note the connection that New Testament authors
made to this concept in Christ, from John's description of Jesus as the
*Logos*---which has in its semantic range not only the idea of "word" but of
"reason"---to Paul's straightforward declaration that "Christ Jesus... became
for us wisdom from God" (1 Cor. 1:30), and to the New Testament's oft-repeated
refrain that Christ was the agent of creation (cf. Col. 1:16, Heb. 1:10--12,
2:10).