Title: The Question and Its Answer
Date: 2014-02-13 23:10
Author: Chris Krycho
Category: theology
Tags: devotions
Passages: Revelation 1–3, Psalm 43, Ecclesiastes 12
Template: formats/devotions
Description: Reading Revelation and Ecclesiastes side by side is like reading the answer to a question.

Here is the great mystery of our faith:

> When I saw him, I fell at his feet as though dead. But he laid his right hand
> on me, saying, "Fear not, I am the first and the last, and the living one. I
> died, and behold I am alive forevermore, and I have the keys of Death and
> Hades." (Revelation 1:17--18)

Jesus is the one who was before all, and he is and forever will be. And Jesus is
also the one who died. And Jesus is also the firstborn from the dead (Revelation
1:5)---he who died now lives again.

As Jesus said of another truth of our faith: with man, these things are
impossible, but with God, all things are impossible.

---

In Revelation 3:11, Jesus said, "I am coming soon." Now, some take this to mean
that the book is a lie; others take it to mean that Jesus came back in some
mystical way and will not return physically to reign on the earth. I take it to
mean that "soon" in the eyes of the Almighty who is first and last and reigns
forever and ever is not exactly the same as "soon" in the eyes of feeble humans
with our limited understanding. The Lord may return any day now---and so it has
been these past twenty centuries. We wait expectantly, calling out in our hearts
(and sometimes with our lips as well) "Lord, come soon!" And in the interval,
this time between the times, we do our best to wait faithfully so that he does
not come like a thief and surprise us (Rev. 3:3).

---

Psalm 43 serves as another reminder that the Psalms are not some haphazard
collection. They were put together in the order they are for a reason. Psalms 42
and 43 are distinct, but they share a refrain and a common line. Whereas 42
functioned as a lament and stated the troubles facing the author, 43 turns and
asks justice of God. The contrast is helpful. There is a time simply to let God
know our sorrows and our frustrations, and then to instruct our souls to praise
him in the midst of those sorrows and frustrations. There is also a time to
plead with him to deliver us, and to instruct our souls to praise him as we wait
for that deliverance to come. Those may seem like small distinctions, but they
matter. We *know* they matter; else the Spirit-inspired editor of the Psalms
would not have placed these two here next to each other to contrast with each
other in this way.

---

Reading the final chapter of Ecclesiastes and the first chapters of Revelation
together is like reading the question and its answer all at once. Ecclesiastes
12 contains some of the most evocative language on the close of life and the
vanity of this-worldly existence to be found anywhere in all the literature of
all the world. It is a sad passage, meditating on the way all things fade away.
Revelation 1, on the other hand, is as clear a declaration that this world is
not all there is as anyone could ask. The eternal king of all rulers stands
forth to declare that he---he who died and now lives again---is coming soon and
will set the world aright, and those who trust in him will receive eternal
rewards and even reign alongside him. The world around us is fading, it is true,
but there will come a day when it is renewed, when all the things that faded
blossom again into gloriously new life. The Preacher could not see that day, but
that he longed to could not be clearer from the text.

So together with him we say, "Lord, come soon."