Title: Call and Response
Subtitle: Psalm 53 and Romans 1–3 in Counterpoint
Description: The ways in which the Bible draws on itself are sometimes astounding. Psalm 53 and Romans 1–3 play off each other in beautiful, hopeful, helpful ways.
Author: Chris Krycho
Date: 2014-03-04 23:50
Tags: devotions
Category: theology
Passages: Proverbs 4, Psalm 53, and Romans 1–3
Template: formats/devotions

The ways in which the Bible draws on itself are sometimes astounding. A case in
point: as is so often the case in my readings, the New Testament reading seems
almost as though drawing explicitly on the Old Testament reading. I should note:
I am not following a lectionary or any particular plan, so it is not as though
this is an intentional thing. Indeed, my reading plan right now is basically:
Psalms, Proverbs, wherever I need to be reading for my Old Testament survey
class, and wherever I feel like reading in the New Testament. Not particularly
complicated! The reason is simpler than a formal plan: it is that the authors
were aware of each other, and later authors clearly drew quite consciously on
the material left behind by those who went before them.

A case in point: Romans 1--3 and Psalm 53 both show us the state of humanity
quite clearly. They get there in different ways, of course. The Psalm arrives by
way of poetic rhythm and the steadily building refrain that there are those who
reject God, culminating in the expectation of judgment on the enemies of God
and blessings for his people (typical enough themes of the Psalms, in some
ways.) In his letter to Rome, Paul builds up this notion by carefully measured
argument (which is not to suggest any lack of *verve* in said argument---this
is Paul we are talking about!) until he comes to the oft-cited and
less-often-really-grasped reality that "all have sinned and fall short of the
glory of God" (Romans 3:23).

What was most striking about Psalm and epistle alike to me was not only their
congruity on the state of humanity, but also their agreement on the answer to
that problem. (This is not *surprising*. Just *striking*. Note well the
difference between the two!) Both look not to human accomplishment or
restitution for undone deeds and deeds that ought to have been left undone, but
to the God who can save his people. The Psalmist cried out, praying, "Oh, that
salvation for Israel would come out of Zion!" (Psalm 53:6). Paul answers:

> But now the righteousness of God has been manifested apart from the law,
> although the Law and the Prophets bear witness to it—the righteousness of God
> through faith in Jesus Christ for all who believe. For there is no
> distinction: for all have sinned and fall short of the glory of God, and are
> justified by his grace as a gift, through the redemption that is in Christ
> Jesus, whom God put forward as a propitiation by his blood, to be received by
> faith. This was to show God's righteousness, because in his divine forbearance
> he had passed over former sins. It was to show his righteousness at the
> present time, so that he might be just and the justifier of the one who has
> faith in Jesus.
> 
> Then what becomes of our boasting? It is excluded. By what kind of law? By a
> law of works? No, but by the law of faith. For we hold that one is justified
> by faith apart from works of the law. Or is God the God of Jews only? Is he
> not the God of Gentiles also? Yes, of Gentiles also, since God is one—who will
> justify the circumcised by faith and the uncircumcised through faith.
> (Romans 3:21-30)

Salvation *did* come for Israel, from Israel, but not only to Israel. Salvation
came also to the nations. For that, I am profoundly grateful: *I* am the
nations, as is almost everyone reading this. We stood condemned under the law
of our conscience just as the Jewish people stood condemned by the law God had
given them. All of us stood in desperate need of intervention, and so God
intervened. All peoples sin, and all peoples[^s] are justified by God's grace.
God is perfectly just, and he does not just overlook sin. He judges it. But he
has judged it *in Christ*, and not in you or me.

Hallelujah.

[^s]: The plurals here are important. It is very different to say that all
*peoples* will be saved than it is to say that all *people* will be saved.